System Calls
============

System calls are an interface through which userland programs can call kernel
functions, mainly those that are I/O-related, and thus require kernel mode
privileges. Userland code cannot of course call kernel functions directly,
since this would imply access to kernel memory, which would break the userland
sandbox and userland programs could corrupt the kernel at their whim. This
means that the system call handlers in the kernel should be written very
carefully. A userland program should not be able to affect normal kernel
functionality *no matter what arguments it passes to the system call* (this is
called *bullet proofing* the system calls).

How System Calls Work
---------------------

A system call is made by first placing the arguments for the system call and
the *system call function number* in predefined registers. In KUDOS, the
standard MIPS32 argument registers ``a0``, ``a1``, ``a3``, and ``a3`` are used
for this purpose. The system call number is placed in ``a0``, and its three
arguments in ``a1``, ``a2`` and ``a3``. If there is a need to pass more
arguments for a system call, this can be easily achieved by making one of the
arguments a memory pointer which points to a structure containing rest of the
arguments.

After the arguments are in place, the special machine instruction ``syscall``
is executed. It generates a system call exception and thus transfers control to
the kernel exception handler. The return value of the system call is placed in
a predefined register by the system call handler. In KUDOS the standard return
value register ``v0`` is used.

The system call exception is handled then as follows (note that not all details
are mentioned here):

1. The context is saved as with any exception or interrupt.

2. As we notice that the cause of the exception was a system call, interrupts
   are enabled and the system call handler is called. Enabling interrupts (and
   also clearing the EXL bit) results in the thread running as a normal thread
   rather than an exception handler.

3. The system call handler gets a pointer to the user context as its argument.
   The system call number and arguments are read from the registers saved in
   the user context, and an appropriate handler function is called for each
   system call number. The return value is then written to the ``v0`` register
   saved in the user context.

4. The program counter in the saved user context is incremented by one
   instruction, since it points to the ``syscall`` instruction which generated
   this exception.

5. Interrupts are disabled (and EXL bit set), and the thread is again running
   as an exception handler.

6. The context is restored, which also restores the thread to user mode.

**Note:** You cannot directly change thread/process (i.e. call scheduler) when
in syscall or other exception handlers, since it will mess up the stack. All
thread changes should be done through (software) interrupts (e.g. calling
``thread_switch``).

System Calls in KUDOS
---------------------

KUDOS userland has a wrapper function for the ``syscall`` instruction, so there
is no need for the user to write code in assembly. In addition, some syscall
wrappers, with proper handling of syscall argumets are implemented in
``userland/lib.c``.  These wrappers, or rather, library functions, are
described below.

When implementing the system calls, the interface must remain *binary
compatible* with the unaltered KUDOS. This means that the already existing
system call function numbers must not be changed and that return value and
argument semantics are exactly as described below. When adding system calls not
mentioned below the arguments and return value semantics can of course be
defined as desired.

Halting the Operating System
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``void syscall_halt(void)``
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This is the only system call already implemented in KUDOS. It will unmount all
mounted filesystems and then power off the machine (YAMS will terminate). This
system call is the *only* method for userland processes to cause the machine to
halt.

File-System Related
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``int syscall_read(int filehandle, void *buffer, int length)``
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

* Read at most *length* bytes from the file identified by
  ``filehandle`` into ``buffer``.

* The read starts at the current file position, and the file
  position is advanced by the number of bytes actually read.

* Returns the number of bytes actually read (e.g. ``0`` if the file
  position is at the end of file), or a negative value on error.

* If the ``filehandle`` is 0, the read is done from ``stdin``
  (the console), which is always considered to be an open file.

* Filehandles 1 and 2 cannot be read from, and attempt to do so will
  always return an error code.

``int syscall_write(int filehandle, const void *buffer, int length)``
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

* Write *length* bytes from *buffer* to the open file
  identified by ``filehandle``.

* Writing starts at the current file position, and the file
  position is advanced by the number of bytes actually written.

* Returns the number of bytes actually written, or a negative
  value on error. (If the return value is less than *length* but
  â‰¥ 0, it means that some error occured but that the file was still
  partially written).

* If the ``filehandle`` is 1, the write is done to ``stdout`` (the
  console), which is always considered to be an open file.

* If the ``filehandle`` is 2, the write is done to ``stderr`` (
  typically, also the console), which is always considered to be an open
  file.

* Filehandle 0 cannot be written to and attempt to do so will always
  return an error code.
